maf_bgzip(1) -- optimally BGZF-compresses and indexes MAF files
===============================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`maf_bgzip` [-d dir] <maf> ...<br>
`maf_bgzip` [-d dir] --index [--all] <maf> ...<br>

## DESCRIPTION

**maf_bgzip** is part of the bioruby-maf library and compresses
Multiple Alignment Format (MAF) files in the Blocked GZip Format
(BGZF), enabling efficient random access. It can optionally index
these files as well.

`maf_bgzip` can be used as an import tool to prepare MAF files from an
external source such as UCSC for use by the other bioruby-maf
tools. Such MAF files are often gzipped; these can be handled
transparently by `maf_bgzip`, without a separate gunzip(1) step.

This is a MAF-specific replacement for the bgzip(1) tool shipped with
samtools. Unlike the output of bgzip(1), each BGZF block (which can be
up to 64 KB of uncompressed data) will contain an integer number of
MAF blocks, except in the case of MAF blocks larger than 64 KB. This
means that except in unusual cases, a MAF block will be able to be
read without having to read more than one BGZF block.

## EXAMPLES

Compress `mm8.chrM.maf`, creating `mm8.chrM.maf.bgz` in the current
directory:

    $ maf_bgzip mm8.chrM.maf

Re-compress and index `mm8.chrM.maf.gz` (on all sequences) into the
`/data/maf/` directory, creating `/data/maf/mm8.chrM.maf.bgz` and
`/data/maf/mm8.chrM.kct`:

    $ maf_bgzip --dir /data/maf --index --all mm8.chrM.maf.gz

As above, but with all `.maf.gz` files in the current directory:

    $ maf_bgzip --dir /data/maf --index --all *.maf.gz

## OPTIONS

 * `-d`, `--dir DIR`:
   The directory to write the compressed MAF files and indexes to.

 * `-i`, `--index`:
   Index the compressed MAF files as by maf_index(1).
   
 * `-a`, `--all`:
   When `--index` is specified, index all sequences, not just the
   reference sequence.
   
## FILES

The MAF files must be valid and have names ending in `.maf`. They may
be gzip-compressed, in which case their names should end with `.maf.gz`.

The BGZF-compressed MAF files will be optimally compressed for random
access and named with a `.maf.bgz` suffix. 

Indexes created will be Kyoto Cabinet databases as created by
maf_index(1) and have the `.maf[.gz]` suffix replaced with `.kct`.

## ENVIRONMENT

`maf_bgzip` is a Ruby program and relies on ordinary Ruby environment
variables.

## BUGS

None known.

## COPYRIGHT

`maf_index` is copyright (C) 2012 Clayton Wheeler.

## SEE ALSO

ruby(1), maf_index(1), bgzip(1)

BGZF is specified in the SAM/BAM specification: <http://samtools.sourceforge.net/SAM1.pdf>
