maf_extract(1) -- extract blocks from MAF files
===============================================

## SYNOPSIS

`maf_extract` -m MAF [-i INDEX] --interval SEQ:START:END [OPTIONS]

`maf_extract` -m MAF [-i INDEX] --bed BED [OPTIONS]

`maf_extract` -d MAFDIR --interval SEQ:START:END [OPTIONS]

`maf_extract` -d MAFDIR --bed BED [OPTIONS]

## DESCRIPTION

**maf_extract** extracts alignment blocks from one or more indexed MAF
files, according to either a genomic interval specified with
`--interval` or multiple intervals given in a BED file specified with
`--bed`. 

It can either match blocks intersecting the specified intervals with
`--mode intersect`, the default, or extract slices of them which cover
only the specified intervals, with `--mode slice`. 

Blocks and the sequences they contain can be filtered with a variety
of options including `--only-species`, `--with-all-species`,
`--min-sequences`, `--min-text-size`, and `--max-text-size`.

With the `--join-blocks` option, adjacent parsed blocks can be joined if
sequence filtering has removed a species causing them to be
separated. The `--remove-gaps` option will remove columns containing
only gaps (`-`).

Blocks can be output in MAF format, with `--format maf` (the default),
or FASTA format, with `--format fasta`. Output can be directed to a
file with `--output`.

This tool exposes almost all the random-access functionality of the
Bio::MAF::Access class. The exception is MAF tiling, which is provided
by maf_tile(1).

## FILES

A single MAF file can be processed by specifying it with `--maf`. Its
accompanying index, created by maf_index(1), is specified with
`--index`. If `--maf` is given but no index is specified, the entire
file will be parsed to build a temporary in-memory index. This
facilitates processing small, transient MAF files. However, on a large
file this will incur a great deal of overhead; files expected to be
used more than once should be indexed with maf_index(1).

Alternatively, a directory of indexed MAF files can be specified with
`--maf-dir`; in this case, they will all be used to satisfy queries.

## OPTIONS

MAF source options:

 * `-m`, `--maf MAF`:
   A single MAF file to process.
   
 * `-i`, `--index INDEX`:
   An index for the file specified with `--maf`, as created by
   maf_index(1).

 * `-d`, `--maf-dir DIR`:
   A directory of indexed MAF files.

Extraction options:

 * `--mode (intersect | slice)`:
   The extraction mode to use. With `--mode intersect`, any alignment
   block intersecting the genomic intervals specified will be matched
   in its entirety. With `--mode slice`, intersecting blocks will be
   matched in the same way, but columns extending outside the
   specified interval will be removed.

 * `--bed BED`:
   The specified file will be parsed as a BED file, and each interval
   it contains will be matched in turn.

 * `--interval SEQ:START:END`:
   A single zero-based half-open genomic interval will be matched,
   with sequence identifier <seq>, (inclusive) start position <start>,
   and (exclusive) end position <end>.

Output options:

 * `-f`, `--format (maf | fasta)`:
   Output will be written in the specified format, either MAF or
   FASTA.

 * `-o`, `--output OUT`:
   Output will be written to the file <out>.

Filtering options:

 * `--only-species (SP1,SP2,SP3 | @FILE)`:
   Alignment blocks will be filtered to contain only the specified
   species. These can be given as a comma-separated list or as a file,
   prefixed with `@`, from which a list of species will be read.

 * `--with-all-species (SP1,SP2,SP3 | @FILE)`:
   Only alignment blocks containing all the specified species will be
   matched. These can be given as a comma-separated list or as a file,
   prefixed with `@`, from which a list of species will be read.

 * `--min-sequences N`:
   Only alignment blocks containing at least <n> sequences will be
   matched.
   
 * `--min-text-size N`:
   Only alignment blocks with a text size (including gaps) of at least
   <n> will be matched.
   
 * `--max-text-size N`:
   Only alignment blocks with a text size (including gaps) of at most
   <n> will be matched.

Block processing options:

 * `--join-blocks`:
   If sequence filtering with `--only-species` removes a species which
   caused two adjacent blocks to be separate, this option will join
   them together into a single alignment block. The filtered blocks
   must contain the same sequences in contiguous positions and on the
   same strand.

 * `--remove-gaps`:
   If sequence filtering with `--only-species` leaves a block
   containing columns consisting only of gap characters (`-`), these
   will be removed.

 * `--parse-extended`:
   Parse `i` lines, giving information on the context of sequence
   lines, and `q` lines, giving quality scores.

 * `--parse-empty`:
   Parse `e` lines, indicating cases where a species does not align
   with the current block but does align with blocks before and after
   it.

Logging options:

 * `-q`, `--quiet`:
   Run quietly, with warnings suppressed.

 * `-v`, `--verbose`:
   Run verbosely, with additional informational messages.
   
 * `--debug`:
   Log debugging information.

## EXAMPLES

TODO

## ENVIRONMENT

`maf_index` is a Ruby program and relies on ordinary Ruby environment
variables.

## BUGS

No provision exists for writing output to multiple files.

FASTA description lines are always in the format `>source:start-end`.

## COPYRIGHT

`maf_index` is copyright (C) 2012 Clayton Wheeler.

## SEE ALSO

ruby(1), maf_index(1), maf_tile(1)
